# SAREK, a workflow for WGS analysis of germline and somatic mutations

Maxime Garcia 1, Szilveszter Juhos 1, Malin Larsson 2, Teresita Diaz de Ståhl 3, Johanna Sandgren 3, Jesper Eisfeldt 4, Sebastian DiLorenzo 5, Marcel Martin 6, Pall Olason 7, Phil Ewels 8, Björn Nystedt 7, Monica Nistér 3, Max Käller 9

As whole genome sequencing is getting cheaper, it is viable to compare NGS data of numerous patients. There are still many challenges, mostly regarding bioinformatics: datasets are huge, workflows are complex, and there are multiple tools to choose from for germline and somatic variants and quality control. We are presenting SAREK a complete open source pipeline to resolve germline or somatic variants from WGS data: it is written in Nextflow, a domain specific language for workflow building. We are following GATK best practices to align, realign and recalibrate short-read data, which is done in parallel for a tumor/normal pair sample. After these preprocessing steps several variant callers scan the resulting BAM files; For structural variants we use Manta. Strelka, and GATK HaplotypeCaller are used to find SNVs and small indels. Furthermore, for somatic variants, MuTect1, MuTect2 and Strelka are used to find SNVs and small indels. Finally, we are applying ASCAT to estimate sample heterogeneity, ploidy and CNVs. The software can start the analysis from raw FASTQ files, from the realignment step, or directly with any subset of variant callers. At the end of the analysis the resulting VCF files are merged to facilitate further downstream processing, though the individual results are also retained. The flow is capable of accommodating further variant calling software or CNV callers. It is also prepared to process normal sample, tumor/normal pairs or even normal, tumor - and several relapse samples. Besides variant calls, the workflow provides quality controls presented by MultiQC. For easy sharing, installation, and to ensure reproducibility, containers (Docker and Singularity) are available. The open source software can be downloaded from https://github.com/SciLifeLab/SAREK .

1. BarnTumörBanken, Dept. of Oncology Pathology, Science for Life Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet
2. Dept. of Physics, Chemistry and Biology, National Bioinformatics Infrastructure Sweden, Science for Life laboratory, Linköping University
3. BarnTumörBanken, Dept. of Oncology Pathology, Karolinska Institutet
4. Clinical Genetics, Dept. of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet
5. Dept. of Medical Sciences, National Bioinformatics Infrastructure Sweden, Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University
6. Dept. of Biochemistry and Biophysics, National Bioinformatics Infrastructure Sweden, Science for Life Laboratory, Stockholm University
7. Dept. of Cell and Molecular Biology, National Bioinformatics Infrastructure Sweden, Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University
8. Dept. of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Science for Life Laboratory, Stockholm University
9. Science for Life Laboratory, School of Biotechnology, Division of Gene Technology, Royal Institute of Technology
