# European Society of Human Genetics - European Human Genetics Conference - Berlin, Germany, 2020-06

## Reproduce easily: analysis of matching tumor-normal NGS data with the Sarek workflow

Szilveszter Juhos,
Maxime Garcia,
Teresita Díaz de Ståhl,
Markus Mayrhofer,
Johanna Sandgren,
Monica Nistér

High throughput sequencing for cancer analysis is almost a routine research tool by now: precision medicine initiatives are relying a lot on NGS technology and it is expected to sift through hundreds or thousands of WGS samples to publish new results.
To achieve this, a validated and stable bioinformatics pipeline is needed that can be used at diverse and secure computing environments.
Sarek is an open-source, container based workflow written in nextflow, that includes all the steps to get from raw FASTQ processing to annotated VCFs.
Its latest development is a filtering and ranking module to pick the most relevant somatic and germline variants, helping researchers to move towards clinical use.

The pipeline gives results for germline SNVs and SVs using HaplotypeCaller, Strelka, Manta and TIDDIT, somatic variants are reported by Strelka, Mutect2 and Manta.
CNVs, sample purity and ploidy is estimated by ASCAT and Control-FREEC.
Furthermore, the software provides a broad set of QC metrics visualized in MultiQC.
The pipeline is modular, other somatic tools and software can be added as new building blocks.
Besides human GRCh37 and GRCh38, other model organism references (i.e. mouse or dog) are available in the base setup.
Starting from raw FASTQs to get annotated VCFs it takes about three days for a 90X/90X sample on a single 48 cores node.
This processing can be speed-up when using Sentieon for alignment.
Although Sarek was developed primarily for whole-genome sequencing, it can take whole-exome or gene-panel samples as well.

Sarek is a member of nf-core, a collection of peer-reviewed set of workflows based on Nextflow.
The supported environments are conda, docker and singularity.
It is HPC-agnostic: can be used either on a single compute node or on a HPC cluser, or on cloud computing such as AWS, with little difference between workflow setups.
Sarek has been used in production at the National Genomics Infrastructure in Sweden to process thousands of germline and hundreds of cancer samples for the Swedish Childhood Tumor Biobank and other research groups.

Sarek and its documentation is available at https://nf-co.re/sarek under MIT license.
